5 SQL techniques to reduce and optimize the complexity of sql queries.

1.Subquery
2.CTE
3.Views
4.Temporary Table
5.CTAs

Why we need those techniques?

DBA responsible for DB structure

Overview of DB architecture

DB is accessed by data analysts to analyze or create reports from complex analytical queries, data engineers to build data warehouses in which they write extract query to extract, transform query to make transformation (manipulation) and load query to collect result and load it in other database called data ware house.

{DATA WAREHOUSE:

A special database that collects and integrates data from different sources to enable analytics and support decision making.

Data analysts us/aie data warehouses to analyze the data or to prepare the data to generate visualization and reports or in excel sheet.

A data warehouse stores structured, cleaned data ready for business reporting, while a data lake stores raw, unprocessed data in any format for deep exploration

These two storage systems serve very different technical needs.

POWER BI: data analytical visualization tool.}-> The entire system we call it Data warehouse system or Business intelligence system


Data Scientist: access to DB to write queries to do ETL in order to develop a model and doing ML/AI.

CHALLENEGES:
Redundancy- repeated queries / code
Performance issues - much time for result when run one query
complexity
hard to maintain
DB stress by analysts how DB model is designed
security 

Solutions: Subquery , CTE(common table expression), View, Temp tables. CTA (create table as select)

behind the database we have data model that is prepared and optimized only for one application.

It takes expertise to understand the physical data model 


Simplified DB architecture
Once you understand architecture , you would be able to understand how data base  execute queries rom these techniques.

Client is requesting data through query.

Server is the place where database lives.

It has database engine - brain of the database , executing multiple operations such as storing , retrieving and managing data within the database.

Storage is an imprtant component.It has two types of storage in db 
DISK storage -- long term memory ,where data is stored 
permanently

+ Capacity holds large data
-speed slow to read and write

CACHE storage

Fast short term memory, where data is stored temporarily.
+speed : extremely fast to read and to write for fast retrieval
-capacity: can hold smaller amount of data.

trade off between the speed  and how much data and how long
--------------------------------------------
In disk storage , three types of storage area

user,  catalog, temp data storage serves different purpose

User data storage

main content of the database
this is where the actual data thatusers careabout is stored.
All relevant and important data is stored.

Eg : Tables

System catalog

It hold metadata info about the database.

metadata is data about data

Temporary storage

used by the db for short term task like processing queries or sorting the data.

 once task is done , storage is cleared by db.

HOW SIMPLE QUERY WORKS represented in picture






