SQL aggregate window functions

why they are called aggregate functions?

aggregate will combine the data or summarize the data and produce the one aggregated value
SQL going to go through all rows in the window or entire dataset and in the output SQL going to give  or summarize you one single aggregated value.

AVG(Sales) OVER (PARTITION BY productid optional, order by sales_id optional, frame optional)


COUNT(*), COUNT(column name) returns the total rows for each window
plus keeping the order details

COUNT , counts all the rows in a table regardless of whether any value is NULL

product sales count
caps	20	3
caps	10	3
caps	5	3

gloves	30	2(3)
gloves	70	2(3)
gloves	NULL	2(3) (2 if count(sales), 3 if count(*) or count(1))

count(column name) ignore null values

count() all data types

USECASE: 
1.Overall analysis: we can use count(*) for quick summary or snapshot of entire dataset

2.Find total no of orders +additionally provide details
we use COUNT(*) OVER() along with other columns details

3. find the total no of order for each customer
Group wise analysis: total per group: to observe the patterns within different category

4. Data quality check 
Detecting number of nulls by comparing total no of rows 

5.Data quality issue 
duplicates leads to inaccuracies in analysis
count() can be used to identify the duplicates.

first we have to check primary and check the data model to find out primary key of particular table we use

count(*) over(partition by orderid) =1


-----------------------------------------------------------------
SUM(sales) OVER(PARTITION BY product) 

product sales sum
caps	20	35
caps	10	35
caps	5	35

gloves	30	100
gloves	70	100
gloves	NULL	100 

USECASES:

find total sales/average sales/summarize/maximum/minimum in all orders
find total sales/average sales/summarize/maximum/minimum  per each product 
provide additional data details

overall analysis
catergorized analysis
comparision analysis- part to whole analysis showscontribution of each datapoint to data set.
compare to extreme analysis
compare current sales to highest or lowest sales

find percentage contribution of each product sales to the total sales

AVG(COALESCE(Sales)) OVER(PARTITION BY productid) coalesce converts null values to specific value like 0 easy for calculations or else inaccurate values.

COMPARE To AVERAGE usecase: Find all orders where sales are higher than the average sales across all orders

WINDOW FUNCTIONS cant be used in the WHERE clause

MIN/MAX window functions

USE CASE show the employess with highest salaries
COMPARE TO EXTREMES 
DISTANCE to EXTEMES

*** RUNNING TOTAL and ROLLING total***

tracking - track current sales with target sales 
trend analysis providing insights into historical patterns.


They aggregate sequence of members and the aggregation is updated each time a new member is added.

Running Total aggregate allvalues frombeginning upto the current point withut dropping off older data

Rolling total - aggregate all vales withina fixed time window a n ew data is added the oldest data point will be dropped.
Rolling /shifting window using summarize window function with frame order by and frame clause

Moving average of each product over time
 
