Data warehouse projects!!!
Data architect
Design a modern data architecture
Data engineer is to write ETL code
Data Modeller who creates the Data models for analysis

What is Data Warehouse?

A subject oriented , integrated ,time variant and non volatile collection of data in support of management's decision making process.
 
subject oriented means focused on a business area like sales, customers, finance,so on.

Integrate multiple source systems

Time variant- we can keep historical data in datawarehouse

non- volatile - once we enter data in data ware house ,it wont delete and modified.

Issues :
Repeating the collection of data the n converts into insightful reports take weeks or months of time .
They become old gradually based on time they created
Handling Big data
Data leak 

Company needs proper data management

Instead of collecting data manually, We prefer important component called ETL process
Extract the data from mutliple Sources
Apply the transformations on extracted data sources
Load this transformed data to the Data warehouse 

Data warehouse is a single point of truth for Analzes and reporting.

All these reports consume this Data warehouse
we can generate integrated reports , multiple reports from multiple sources

The whole process is completely automated.

Datawarehouse is completely integrated and maintain historical data.
Modern data warehouse in cloud platforms, we can easily handle big data

Accessing the sources. building the ETLs
,build Database for datawarehouse

For reports , data warehouse is used by data analyst.

Instead of collecting data manually, We prefer important component called ETL process
Extract the data from mutliple Sources
Apply the transformations on extracted data sources
Load this transformed data to the Data warehouse 

Data warehouse is a single point of truth for Analzes and reporting.

All these reports consume this Data warehouse
we can generate integrated reports , multiple reports from multiple sources

The whole process is completely automated.

Datawarehouse is completely integrated and maintain historical data.
Modern data warehouse in cloud platforms, we can easily handle big data

Accessing the sources. building the ETLs
,build Database for datawarehouse

For reports , data warehouse is used by data analyst.

ETL Process

Extract: Pull out required data from sources, no manipulations on data done at this stage, only extraction
Transformation : We can apply manipulations like changing shape of the data, data cleansing, integration , normalizations. reshape to formatting etc.. heavy working task
Load : The prepared data is loaded to Data warehouse (target)

warehouse vs data warehouse vs data lake

Data Architecture

Source
|
EL
|
layer 1
|
ETL
|
layer2
|
TL
| 
layer 3
|
L
|
layer 4
|T

Overview of different techinques ad methods in ETL

EXTRACTION

extraction methods

1.pull extraction
2.push extraction

extraction types

1.full extraction
2.incremental extraction

extraction techinques

1.Manual data extraction -- access to source system , extract it manually
2.Database querying- query the data by connecting to db
3.File parsing- file to pass it to the data warehouse
4.API calls - connect to API to get data
5.Event based Streaming- connected to kafka for  streaming data
6.CDC - similar to Streaming
7.Web Scraping- extract info from web through scrpting

TRANSFORMATION

1.Data Enrichment
2.Data Integration
3.Derived Columns
4.Data Noramlizaton & Standardization
5.Business Rules and Logic
6.Data Aggregations
7.Data Cleansing
	Remove Duplicates
	Data Filtering
	Handling missing data
	Handling invalid values
	outlier Detection
	Data type Casting
	Handling unwanted spaces
	
Load

1.Processing types
	Batch Processing
	Stream Processing
2.Load methods
	Full Load
		Truncate & insert
		Upsert
		Drop,create, insert
	Incremental Load
		upsert
		append
		merge
3.Slowly Changing Dimensions
	SCD 0 No historization
	SCD 1 overwrite((more famous)  
	SCD2 Historization 
	SCD_

