SQL Subqueries

Types of subqueries and its operators

how sql execute subqueries ? how it helps for optimization?

What is subquery?

query(sub) inside another query(main)
 
sub query interacts with db and produce an intermediate result .
This intermediate result is not displayed to the users as result 

It acts like a supporter to the main query only main query can access it locally no other independent separate query can. Main query operates on the intermediate result , produce the final result that is visible to the us. 
Main query interacts with database.

When to use subquery??

take a complex task like

join tables->filtering-> transformation->aggregations

it ends up like hard complex sql query ,4 queries to execute above process
by using (subquery , subquery->subquery->subquery->main query) one query(nested queries)it is easy  to read and can mainatain logical flow inside query.

Sub Query Categories:

Dependency
---
Non correlated subquery
Correlated query

Result types
----
1.scalar query
  when result shows only one value. Eg : SELECT AVG(sales) FROM Orders. 
2.Row query
 when result shows one column and multiple records.
 Eg: SELECT customers FROM orders
3.table query
  when result shows multiple column and multiple records.
 Eg: SELECT * FROM orders

location and clauses
---
Select 
From
Join
Where - comparison operators(>=,<=,<,>) and logical operators(IN, ANY, ALL, EXISTS)

--> how to use subquery in the FROM clause?

used as temporary table for the main query

SELECT col1, col2, col3..
FROM (SELECT col..FROM WHERE condition)AS alias

usecase: Find the products that have price higher than the average price of all products

How data base execute subqueries?
Data base engine reads the sub query and execute and produce the intermediate result by connecting disk storage and later on it stores the sub result in cache for faster retrieval. Now main query checks the sub result from cache and execute main query and produce the final result.


--> Subquery in SELECT clause:
used to aggregate data side by side with the main query's data ,allowing for direct comparison.

SELECT
 column1,
 (SELECT column FROM table 1 WHERE condition)
FROM table1

rule : only scalar value is allowed to be used , subquery must produce scalar value.

--> Subquery in JOIN clause:
Used to prepare the data (filtering or aggregation) before joining it with other tables

--> Subquery in WHERE clause:
Used for complex filtering logic and makes query more flexible and dynamic

SELECT column1, column2 ..
FROM table 1
with comparison operators
WHERE column =(SELECT column FROM table2 WHERE condition)

rule: only scalar value is allowed to be used , subquery must produce scalar value.

with IN operators

checks whether a value matches any value from a list.

with ANY /ALL operators when comparing 

WHERE < ANY(subquery)
WHERE < ALL(subquery)

Types of subqueries on Dependency based 
correlated vs non correlated

Non correlated 
A subquery that can run independently from the Main query-standalone query

subquery runs first and gets intermediate result once done main query comes into picture and produces the final result.


Correlated sub query 

A subquery that relays on values from the main query

data base checks main query , main query is executed row by row , first row from the main query passes to the subquery and sub query reaches db and if subquery yields the result , it displays on final result , if doesn't it will skip that row and move to next row.















